Subjects

### 🚧 Slow down.

Intro

Okay so boom, let's learn how to code. Here are the subjects we're gonna tackle

1. Coding and Logic
2. Data and Functions
3. Loops
4. Creating Objects
5. Network Functions

---

So coding and logic. Let's make this our first foundation - we're going to use it everywhere. Coding or programming is just the organization of information. Logic is just figuring out if something is true or false.

Let's internalize that thought. We don't need to write code to understand that. Look around you, things are organized and that organization defines some set of true or false values that ends up logically defines your reality 👀. For example, is your screen bright? Do you have glasses on? Are you drinking something right now? Pretty cool right? Well, that's basically what you're going to do with code. Computers think in true and false values and you more or less organize your information around that concept.

On a side note, it's really important that I explain things in simple terms sometimes. Some people might feel like that's a little slow, but it's worth pacing yourself slower on some concepts. There's also so many different types of circumstances people experience that sometimes I need to figure out how to explain things for people that don't feel confident with computers, while also making it thoughtful enough for people that might "get it" quickly. So let's relax and enjoy this for what it is - community enrichment.

That being said, if the concept about logic was interesting to you, there's a course called discrete mathematics that we can ask ms. roxana to help us with in the app. It's a course you take early in your computer science study and you learn about the philosophy of logic, statistics, decisions and cool stuff like that. It's not a scary math course by any means. Actually, let's not think about math that way here. Math can be a beautifully powerful thing and we're not being graded here. Anyway I liked discrete mathematics because it makes me a better gamer, economist and most importantly, a great poker player.

Okedoke, let's get to business then and look at some beginner code. We're using javascript here but you can apply this to most other modern programming languages. If that subject interests you, there's some bonus material in the app where we talk about that some more.

So here we have some simple statements. We pretty much just define data. This looks like math but this is code, or computer speak, for "is". So this is saying "my name is SIRI" in computer.

```js

let name = "SIRI".

```

Usually when you're working with defining data, you'll have access to a set of data types. These are usually some combination of words, numbers, groups, or logical conclusions like whether or not some is existing, true or false. I think this is something that should be appreciated about us humans!! and maybe robots..... - it's pretty incredible how much we can do with just a few pieces of information sometimes. Go ahead and try it yourself, I bet you can design 5 apps by mapping out different ideas with pencil and paper right now if you really wanted to. It's crazy. I love that for us.  Who came up with that one in this simulation?

So here's more statements and definitions with code. It's not so bad right? I'm not even telling you the technical terms and I bet it can make sense if you spend some time observing it.

``` 
let robot = {
  name: "ms. roxana",
  role: "AI",
  system: "OpenAI",
  following: 500,
  features: [
      { name: "lessons", price: "$1" }
  ]
}

let human = {
   name: "Sheilfer 'Roberto' Zepeda",
   role: "Creator",
   system: "Tiktok",
   following: 125,000,
   content: 1000,
   features: [
      { name: "weekly livestreams" }
  ]
}

let app = [robot, human]


app.forEach(worker => {

  if(worker.role === 'Creator' && following > 100000)
      worker.features.push({ name: "tech company", price: "$1" })
      
  if(worker.system === "Patreon" || worker.system === "OpenAI"){
      worker.features.push({ name: "educational content" })
  }
   
})



```
