This is an initial essay and early access content to a lecture that will be released as "Self-Esteem" under the creator path. Feel welcome to provide further feedback or insight on this subject.
Introduction
Before starting, let’s step away from our predictable prejudices about the study of psychology, the conversations around it and its social impacts on the modern day so that we can begin to reform a stronger mental model around the subject. If we’re being honest, our generation and the generation before us has no real temporal concept of what a normal life is. Normal life, for all intents and purposes, did not really align with our narrow slice in history. We have no meaningful guidance or example to draw from.
That’s just the simple truth, we're mostly positioned to understand a world governed by the consequences of supernatural economic forces. Another peculiarity is that many of you, or us, find ourselves here as the first English speaking natives, which again, adds another layer of perspective. English itself has layers, whether it’s the business-savvy speech used in corporate offices, the specialized speech used in digital media  or the well-crafted speech by the academic. Simply put, the intersections of our existence on this plane is not immediately natural.
This is going to have consequences, and we may refer to them as generational curses or important conversations. You’ve heard about these before - men need therapy, hispanics need therapy, we need to complete our degrees, we need to be good parents, we need to rest, we need to be presentable, we need more self-love! The real challenge is how do we do these things from the right place? How do we do those things mindfully rather than in service to the glory of infinite productivity? How do we tap into peace?
These kinds of pressures are have consequences, which then brings us to these so-called difficult conversations and antidotes around depression, anxiety or the now-popular ADHD. So let’s leave all of that at the door. We don’t need it. I’m sure that we can agree that these conversations are typically poorly programmed, communicated or introduced.
Self-Esteem
So before going into the clinical, let’s start off with a simple concept that we fundamentally have some control over. That’s self-esteem. It's our exposure to things. In short, self-esteem is how you feel about yourself or about things.
Let’s just focus on “how you feel” part. Many people don’t do this. We feel, but don't spend too much time thinking about how we feel. We don’t revisit it. Truthfully, all of us do this and this can spark the process of declining mental health.
So one way or the other, whether you have severe PTSD or bite your nails out of some emotion, you’re going to have to value the time spent thinking how you feel and the outcomes of whether you want to continue feeling that way. That’s the first step.
Self-Acceptance
Self-esteem is how you feel about yourself or about things. The "about yourself or about things". The second part is somewhat of a Pandora’s box. Who are you and what are things? Why does “it” matter? What is perceived and what is understood?
At this point I recommend considering this mental model. Everything is true. That means multiple things can be true. You can be depressed and you can love life. You can have terrible focus and get an enormous amount of work done. You can hate someone and you can love them. Things can be personal or they can not be unserious. You can influence a lot around you and you have very little control over things.
Traditionally, these conflicts can cause people confusion. Here are interesting examples of this: Some families may not talk for weeks, months or even years. Some families talk daily. Neither is more correct or superior. Some cultures value eye contact, others do not. Again, neither is more correct or superior. Sometimes your perspective is informed only by a matter of the circumstance you were exposed to, but that does not necessarily mean that you have to operate or perform within the boundaries of those circumstances.
Self-acceptance is understanding that you can justly navigate the various perspectives about you or about things. Many people experience this as some form of liberation only because you’re removing one dominant or oppressive framework that guides your perspective in favor of the other universal ones that exist.
Shame
It’s important to decouple our understanding of emotional health from systems of productivity because those systems produce some level of shame. It is omnipresent. Shame can be casted in many common forms, ranging from envy, to fear of rejection or to some other kind of inferiority.
One may wonder why such a cruel thing exists, but it’s ultimately a byproduct or waste of a competitive system. Systems of competition can or will produce some level of shame. There are winners and losers, one might say.
But fortunately for us, we’re reworking or improving our mental models here. The winners and losers concept is a popular default and we can spend time to alter it in meaningful ways.
So here’s the thing - not all shame is bad. Sometimes it’s justified. If you were a world champion athlete and you lost a high stakes game - well, what would you feel? It's clearly fine to feel some level of anger, disappointment or other intense negative emotion right? Sometimes it’s something we sign up for.
The real issue is when we are unaware with unknowns or when it embeds around us like some cosmic dark matter. We want to be aware that these systems of capital, competition and production are also systems that produce shame and we ought to be wiser to its influence. We want to be appropriately discerning throughout this reality, but it also serves individuals to practice positive-self talk to immediately counteract some of these passive consequences. One would probably agree that things are attuned toward negativity, pessimism or other easy default-mode and positive self-talk provides a healthy counterbalance to the pressures that be.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I hope that these frameworks and models helped you consider or realize some of the complexities that you’re experiencing, have experienced or may experience. Take some time to work with these concepts to improve the quality of your thoughts or experiences. Try to resist creating a system of productivity along the way with it. It’s worth the time as it may alleviate excess symptoms of depression, anxiety or inability to focus along the journey.
Otherwise, if after enough work and practice, consider the opportunities to receive specialized help with those conditions. The work in this domain is far and wide and it's an important subject to respect. As difficult as it may be at times, we do have to have some level of accountability over our quality of life and there are inevitable choices we have to make when it comes to defining ourselves and our experiences.
